OPS-57 Initial QN (#42)
vatnz-dev/sops: docs/aerodromes/Class-C/nzqn.md

| Runway | Procedure     | Allowed A/C Catagories      | RNP-AR Required | Notes                           |
| ------ | ------------- | --------------------------- | ----------------|-------------------------------- |
|   23   | `ANPOV #B`    | Cat A to C                  | Yes             | **Preffered Jet Northbound**    |
|   23   | `FRANKTON #`  | Cat A to C                  | No              | Strictly Visual Procedure       |
|   23   | `IPNOR #B`    | Cat A to C                  | Yes             | **Preffered Jet International** | 
|   23   | `REDOL #B`    | Cat B only                  | Yes             |                                 | 
|   23   | `VAPLI #`     | Cat A to C                  | No              | Contains a visual segment       |

### Helicopters

Helicopter operations are very frequent within Queenstown CTR/C, usually operating outside Tower's airspace but must be managed with care. 

!!! warning
    A reminder that Queenstown Tower must ensure that no VFR aircraft are present within the Instrument Sector when an aircraft is beyond the FAP of the active approach procedure.

### Use of the Preferential Runway System

> Use of the Preferential Runway System is not authorised and Controllers shall nominate a single runway direction for both take-off and landing.

Reviewer: This can be removed.

  <figcaption>Queenstown Control Zone (CTR/C)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Areas of Responsibility 

The areas of responsiblility are as depicted below. 

<figure markdown>
  ![Queenstown Areas of Responsibility](./assets/nzqn-resp.png) 
  <figcaption>Queenstown Areas of Responsibility</figcaption>
</figure>

### Transfer of Control Points

| Transfer Flow       | Requirements                                                                             | Notes                                                                                    |
| ------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Delivery -> Ground  | Once PDC has been issued either through Voice or DCL.                                    | This is only effective if Ground is online otherwise the aircraft is transfered to Tower | 
| Ground -> Tower     | Prior to arriving at their assigned hold, once clear of other traffic.                   | This is only effective if Ground is online                                               |

> | Tower -> Ground     | Once clear of the active runway.                                                         | This is only effective if Ground is online otherwise aircraft remain with Tower          |

Reviewer 2: Move to last entry following `Approach -> Tower`

| Tower -> Approach   | For airline traffic, when airborne. For GA, when leaving the zone, if applicable.        |                                                                                          |
| Approach -> Tower   | When established on an instrument final, or if on an RNP approach, overhead the IAF.     |                                                                                          |

## Clearance Delivery

> Clearances shall be ssued by the Delivery position (if online), and may be given via DCL or voice.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Clearances shall be issued by the Delivery position (if online) and may be given via DCL or voice.
```

## Ground 

The following only applies if Ground is online, otherwise these operations will be managed by the Tower. 

### Pushback

Pushback and start up clearances are managed by the Ground Controller. For pushbacks on apron areas the phraseology “Push your discretion” is used to indicate that the pushback
is contained within an uncontrolled portion of the movement area and that ATC may not be aware of all apron activity.

### Taxiing

> If ground is online taxi insturctions will be issued by them, otherwise it is delegated to Tower when ground is offline.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Ground is online taxi instructions will be issued by them, otherwise it is delegated to Tower.  
```

### Use of Holding Points 

> If `23` is the Duty Runway then `A4` hold shall be used for all departures, and for `05` `A3` hold shall be used. This is to ensure landing aircraft can backtrack and vacate, this also allows for a departing aircraft to backtrack after an arriving aircraft has passed that holding point. Increasing overall efficiency of arrivals and departures.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If `23` is the Duty Runway then `A4` hold shall be used for all departures, and for `05` `A3` hold shall be used. This is to ensure landing aircraft can backtrack and vacate and also allows for a departing aircraft to backtrack after an arriving aircraft has passed that holding point increasing overall efficiency of arrivals and departures.  
```

If `14/32` is to be used for light aircraft, then holding points are to be used as required or if specifically requested by the pilot. 

## Tower

> The Tower Controller is responable for all arivals and departures, plus any VFR aircraft operating within the QN CTR/C. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Tower Controller is responsible for all arrivals and departures, plus any VFR aircraft operating within the QN CTR/C. 
```
